billion years ago the toxic air was
devoid of oxygen
molten lava spewed into a noxious sea
and yet these were the perfect
conditions for the building blocks of
life to form
such foul waters may have been the
crucibles of creation
chemicals reigned in and ultraviolet
radiation and lightning bombarded them
an organic suit gradually formed mall
was chaos but order and complexity
somehow emerged
a very special molecule with an elegant
spiral shape arose it alone copied
itself faster than it was destroyed and
multiplied
this renewal was the origin of life
and once it found protection inside cell
walls life was set to transform the
planet
when cells first trapped the sun's
energy three and a half billion years
ago life began to blossom
the oceans teem with simple plants and
mats of them layered with sediment built
the world's first living monuments
stromatolites for over a billion years
these 3 foot high mounds were the
pinnacles of life's progress but the
earth would be transformed by their
waste oxygen this new gas at first toxic
to all life gave rise to the ozone layer
shielded for the first time from the
sun's damaging ultraviolet rays life now
made huge advances plants which had
produced oxygen in the first place now
came under threat from primitive animals
that thrived on oxygen and consumed them
amoeba engulfed plants ciliates wafted
them inside 2 billion years ago
single-celled animals first did what
grazing mammals do now they used oxygen
to burn up plant food
but how did the spectacle of today arise
from such simple origins progress came
when identical cells teamed up to form
cooperative bodies
then life really moved on as cells
specialized in jellyfish some gave
propulsion others caught food
multi-celled life was now taking shape
the advance was driven by genes deep
within a recent breakthrough in under